feat: Added details of EntityOperator in Stretch clusters (#22)
aswinayyolath/stretch-kafka-docs: docs/entityoperator.md

```

### Summary of How Applications Use KafkaTopic & KafkaUser CRs

| Action    | Operator Responsible |
| -------- | ------- |
| Developer creates a `KafkaTopic` CR  | Topic Operator creates & syncs the topic in Kafka    |
| Developer creates a KafkaUser CR | User Operator creates the user & credentials  |
| Application retrieves credentials from Kubernetes Secrets	| Application mounts the secrets for authentication |
| Application connects to Kafka using these credentials | Producer/Consumer communicates with Kafka  |

## Impact of Central Cluster Failure on Kafka Clients in a Stretch Cluster

In stretch Kafka deployment, where

✅ Kafka brokers and controllers are spread across multiple Kubernetes clusters.<br>
✅ The central cluster hosts all Kafka CRs, including Kafka, KafkaNodePool, KafkaUser, and KafkaTopic.<br>
✅ The Entity Operator (managing users & topics) runs in the central cluster.

## What About Entity Operator Functions?
The Entity Operator becomes unavailable when the central cluster goes down. However, this does not impact existing Kafka clients directly because

- Kafka clients do not interact with the Entity Operator at runtime.

> - User authentication still works as long as secrets (TLS/SCRAM) were distributed to all clusters.

Reviewer: Can you explain why we nee to add this `as long as secrets (TLS/SCRAM) were distributed to all clusters.` 

I would expect Kafka to store user credentials in ZK / controllers and not rely on topic operator implementation.

> - Topics and ACLs remain intact but cannot be updated or created until the central cluster recovers.

Reviewer: Again topic and user management using custom resources is blocked, but users can create topics/users in Kafka as normal.

Author: I'm not sure what the confusion here is but I will try to share what my understanding is and I'm not claiming that I'll be 100% accurate here... and happy to get corrected, But we need to have a handle on this before we revise or add anything in the proposal related to EO.

Kafka clients don't directly interact with the Entity Operator's components (Topic and User Operators) during their normal message operations. Even EO is not mandatory as far as Strimzi is concerned, but is highly recommended. Existing topics and ACLs will remain operational on the Kafka brokers in the member clusters.

However, it's crucial to understand the limitations and the broader impact of the Central cluster failure in this scenario, especially when considering the use of KafkaUser and KafkaTopic custom resources for management.

While clients might continue to send and receive messages for a period, the absence of the Entity Operator in the Central cluster severely restricts the managed control plane for your Kafka environment. This leads to the following critical implications

1. Although existing authenticated clients might continue, the ability to create new users, reset passwords, or manage user credentials through the KafkaUser CRs is entirely blocked. This will eventually lead to authentication issues as existing credentials expire or need to be updated.

2. Any changes to authorization rules defined in KafkaUser CRs cannot be applied. The access control is frozen at the state it was in before the Central cluster failure.

3. New topics cannot be created, and the configuration of existing topics cannot be modified using the KafkaTopic CRs. This limits the ability of applications to scale, adapt to new requirements, or address issues related to topic configuration.

4. The core benefit of using Strimzi and Kubernetes for managing Kafka (declarative configuration, automation, reconciliation) is significantly impaired. Relying on direct Kafka API interactions for user and topic management bypasses this managed approach and can lead to inconsistencies and operational challenges.

Therefore, while the immediate impact might not be a complete outage for all connected clients, the failure of the Central cluster, and consequently the Entity Operator, creates a significant degradation in the manageability, security, and adaptability of teh stretched Kafka cluster.

## What Happens If No Cluster Has KafkaUser and KafkaTopic CRs?

If the central cluster is the only one hosting KafkaUser and KafkaTopic CRs, then when it goes down:

1. User Authentication Risks

   - Kafka brokers in surviving clusters rely on existing secrets for authentication.
   - If KafkaUser secrets were only stored in the central cluster and not replicated, brokers in other clusters will be unable to authenticate client requests.
   - New client connections will fail since brokers cannot verify credentials.

>    - Existing client connections may remain active if they were authenticated before the central cluster failure, but they will eventually be disconnected when session timeouts occur.

Reviewer: Are you sure of this behaviour? Managing user credentials and ACLS is a Kafka capability and should not be specific to use of entity operator. So I was not expecting these restrictions.

Author: Kafka itself has its own authentication and authorization capabilities. My intention in this section was to highlight the impact on clients within the context of a Strimzi deployment that utilizes the Entity Operator for managing users and their credentials through Kubernetes Secrets. The restriction isn't on Kafka's core functionality, but on the availability of the managed credentials (e.g., TLS certificates stored in Kubernetes Secrets) that the User Operator in the Central cluster typically manages and might not be automatically replicated across all clusters in a stretched setup. Ensuring proper secret replication across clusters is crucial for maintaining authentication in such scenarios.

Author: Kafka itself enforces authentication if credentials are stored inside Kafka (like SCRAM-SHA passwords). But if authentication relies on Kubernetes Secrets (like TLS certs), and those secrets were not replicated, authentication will fail AFAIK

Author: You’re correct that Kafka itself is responsible for enforcing authentication and ACLs, regardless of hte Entity Operator’s availability. However, whether authentication continues to work after a central cluster failure depends on how credentials were managed and distributed

SCRAM credentials are stored within Kafka’s metadata log (KRaft). Since these credentials are part of Kafka’s internal state, authentication will continue to work as long as the metadata remains accessible in the surviving clusters.

TLS certificates are typically managed via Kubernetes Secrets when using the KafkaUser CR. If these Secrets were only stored in the central cluster and not replicated to the member clusters, brokers in surviving clusters will be unable to verify new client connections. In this case, authentication failures will occur for new client connections, even though existing sessions may persist until session timeouts.

Kafka itself enforces ACLs stored in its metadata. Existing ACLs will still be applied, but new ACLs cannot be created or updated until the central cluster and the Entity Operator are restored.

| Application retrieves credentials from Kubernetes Secrets	| Application mounts the secrets for authentication |
| Application connects to Kafka using these credentials | Producer/Consumer communicates with Kafka  |

## Impact of Central Cluster Failure on Kafka Clients in a Stretch Cluster

In stretch Kafka deployment, where

- ✅ Kafka brokers and controllers are spread across multiple Kubernetes clusters.
- ✅ The central cluster hosts all Kafka CRs, including Kafka, KafkaNodePool, KafkaUser, and KafkaTopic.
- ✅ The Entity Operator (managing users & topics) runs in the central cluster.

## Does the Kafka Cluster Still Function?

Yes, but with conditions.

- Brokers in other Kubernetes clusters are still running.
- Kafka controllers may still be running (if a quorum is maintained).

Replication between brokers (spread across clusters) continues as long as there’s a majority quorum of controllers.

- ✅ If a majority of controllers are still available in the surviving clusters, Kafka continues running.
- 🚨 If the majority of controllers were in the central cluster and lost, Kafka will experience a complete outage.

> 💡 Mitigation -> user need to ensure the `controller.quorum.voters` are spread across clusters to avoid losing the majority.

Reviewer: Information in this section is generic to stretch cluster. not specific to entity operator, and can be confusing. I'd prefer that this page only talks about scenarios that are unique to entity operator and it's use.

Author: Okay I will make that change

## Can Kafka Clients Still Communicate with Brokers?

> Yes, if at least one broker remains reachable.

Reviewer: again this is not related to entity operator

Clients connect to brokers, not the Entity Operator or the central cluster.

- If clients' bootstrap servers list includes brokers running in the surviving clusters, they can still connect.
- If a leader partition for a topic is hosted on a broker in a surviving cluster, the topic remains available.

> - If all leader partitions for a topic were on brokers in the central cluster, that topic becomes unavailable.

Reviewer: In this situation Kafka should select a new leader for the topic, we should make that clear. Also, this is how Kafka works when deployed in a single cluster and a broker goes down. So IMO this is again not specific to the entity operator or stretch cluster.

💡 Mitigation -> Use Kafka’s rack awareness (`broker.rack`) and ISR (In-Sync Replica) balancing to distribute leader partitions across clusters.

## Can Clients Still Produce & Consume Messages?

Yes, if leader partitions are available.
No, if all leader partitions were in the lost central cluster.

**Producing Messages**

- A producer can send messages only if the leader partition for a topic is still available in a surviving cluster.
- If the leader was in the lost central cluster, Kafka automatically elects a new leader (if ISR exists).
- If no ISR exists, production fails.

**Consuming Messages**

- Consumers can still fetch messages from available partitions.
- If consumer group metadata was stored in a lost broker, the group might experience issues.

💡 Mitigation -> Enable `min.insync.replicas` and leader election across clusters to ensure partition availability.

> ## What About Entity Operator Functions?

Reviewer: IMO this is the important section in this page as the rest is documenting our understanding of how EO works and generic stretch cluster aspects.

The Entity Operator becomes unavailable when the central cluster goes down. However, this does not impact existing Kafka clients directly because

- Kafka clients do not interact with the Entity Operator at runtime.
- User authentication still works as long as secrets (TLS/SCRAM) were distributed to all clusters.
- Topics and ACLs remain intact but cannot be updated or created until the central cluster recovers.

Kafka clients (producers and consumers) can still authenticate and connect to Kafka brokers in the surviving clusters as long as the necessary authentication credentials (secrets) are available in those clusters.

> If the KafkaUser secrets only exist in the central cluster, then when it goes down, clients in other clusters cannot authenticate to Kafka brokers. However, if these secrets were already copied to all clusters where brokers are running, authentication will still work even if the central cluster is down.

Reviewer: Is the issue that clients will loose access to the secrets, so they can not set appropriate credentials on the requests to Kafka? 

or 

Are you implying that Kafka brokers can not handle the requests as it uses these secrets to do the authentication?

### Using These Credentials in a Kafka Client

**Example**

##### Java Producer Example (TLS Authentication)

```java
Properties props = new Properties();
props.put("bootstrap.servers", "my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093");
props.put("security.protocol", "SSL");
props.put("ssl.truststore.location", "/etc/secrets/ca.p12");
props.put("ssl.truststore.password", "password");
props.put("ssl.keystore.location", "/etc/secrets/user.p12");
props.put("ssl.keystore.password", "password");

KafkaProducer<String, String> producer = new KafkaProducer<>(props);
```

#### Java Consumer Example (SCRAM-SHA Authentication)

```java
Properties props = new Properties();
props.put("bootstrap.servers", "my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093");
props.put("security.protocol", "SASL_SSL");
props.put("sasl.mechanism", "SCRAM-SHA-512");
props.put("sasl.jaas.config", "org.apache.kafka.common.security.scram.ScramLoginModule required username='my-app-user' password='my-secret-password';");

KafkaConsumer<String, String> consumer = new KafkaConsumer<>(props);

```

**Impact on Clients:**

> The fact that the User Operator manages credentials and ACLs through Kafka's standard mechanisms means that the availability of the User Operator is crucial for:

Reviewer: is this section only for user operator or for both UO and TO?

- Creating and managing new user identities within Kafka.
- Ensuring that the correct authentication credentials are in place and accessible.
- Defining and enforcing authorization rules for user access to topics.

> When the Central cluster (and thus the User Operator) is unavailable, the ability to perform these management tasks is lost, directly impacting the ability of clients to authenticate and operate with the expected level of access. While the underlying Kafka authentication and authorization capabilities exist within the brokers, the management and provisioning through the Kubernetes control plane are disrupted. This means that administrators will not be able to create, update, or delete Kafka users and topics, including performing credential rotations and ACL updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Creating, viewing, updating and deleting user identities and their permissions (ACL) within Kafka.
- Creating, viewing, updating and deleting topics and their configuration within Kafka.

When the Central cluster (and thus the Entity Operator) is unavailable:
- administrators will not be able to view create, update, or delete Kafka users and topics via Kubernetes custom resources.
- existing users, topics and client applications using those credentials will continue to work as usual with no disruption. 
```

- If TLS certificates secrets are not replicated across all clusters, new client deployments and credential updates will fail. However, existing clients with valid TLS certificates will continue functioning until their certificates expire or require rotation. The duration for which they can operate depends entirely on the expiration date set when the certificates were issued.
- If SCRAM credentials have been successfully replicated across the Kafka brokers, existing clients should be able to continue authenticating, even if the Central cluster is down. The issue is with new client deployments or credential updates.
- Existing client connections that were authenticated before the central cluster failure might remain active for a period, but their continued operation depends on multiple factors. If a Kafka broker restarts, clients may need to re-authenticate, which could fail if they rely on new credentials from an unavailable Entity Operator. Additionally, the configured `session.timeout.ms` and Kafka’s reauthentication behavior may determine how long clients remain connected before being disconnected.

> - Crucially, the management of credentials (e.g., rotation) through the User Operator will be unavailable.

Reviewer: I don't think this is presenting a clear picture and there are a number of sentences with `might` which we should change to a more assertive sentence.

IMO:
- administrators will not be able to view create, update, or delete Kafka users and their credentials via Kubernetes custom resources.
- administrators will not be able to view create, update, or delete Kafka topics and their configuration via Kubernetes custom resources.
- existing users, topics and client applications using those credentials will continue to work as usual with no disruption as long as the credentials remain valid.

Reviewer: if we really need to call out a plan B, we should provide steps on how can someone setup entity operator on a different cluster using custom resource definitions from a GitOps branch.

#### Authorization

- The ACLs defined in KafkaUser CRs are configured on the Kafka brokers. These ACLs will generally remain in place.
- However, any new authorization rules or modifications to existing ones defined in KafkaUser CRs cannot be applied because the User Operator is down.

> - TLS certificates used for authentication expire and rotate periodically. Without the User Operator, expired certificates cannot be renewed, leading to eventual authentication failures.

Reviewer: how is this different to Kafka broker certs in absence of central cluster?
